README.md, before:

# mhrv

[![Documentation
Status](https://readthedocs.org/projects/mhrv/badge/?version=latest)](https://mhrv.readthedocs.io/en/latest/?badge=latest)

`mhrv` is a matlab toolbox for calculating Heart-Rate Variability (HRV) metrics
from both ECG signals and RR-interval time series. The toolbox works with ECG
data in the [PhysioNet](https://physionet.org/) [1] WFDB data format.

## Features

- **WFDB wrappers and helpers**. A small subset of the PhysioNet WFDB tools are
  wrapped with matlab functions, to allow using them directly from matlab. For
  example,
    * `mhrv.wfdb.gqrs` - A QRS detection algorithm.
    * `mhrv.wfdb.rdsamp` - For reading PhysioNet signal data into matlab.
    * `mhrv.wfdb.rdann` - For reading PhysioNet annotation data into matlab.
    * `mhrv.wfdb.wrann` - For writing PhysioNet annotation data from matlab datatypes.
    * `mhrv.wfdb.wfdb_header` - Read record metadata from a WFDB header file (`.hea`).

- **ECG signal processing**. Peak detection and RR interval extraction from ECG data
  in PhysioNet format. For example,
    * `mhrv.wfdb.rqrs` - Detection of R-peaks in ECG signals (based on PhysioNet's
      `gqrs`). Configurable for use with both human and animal ECGs.
    * `mhrv.ecg.jqrs`/`mhrv.ecg.wjqrs` - An ECG peak-detector based on a modified Pan & Tompkins
      algorithm and a windowed version.
    * `mhrv.ecg.bpfilt`- Bandpass filtering for removing noise artifacts from ECG
      signals.
    * `mhrv.wfdb.ecgrr` - Construction of RR intervals from ECG data in PhysioNet format.
    * `mhrv.wfdb.qrs_compare` - Comparison of QRS detections to reference annotations and
      calculation of quality measures like Sensitivity, PPV.

- **RR-intervals signal processing**. Ectopic beat rejection, frequency filtering,
  nonlinear dynamic and fractal analysis. For example,
    * `mhrv.rri.filtrr` - Filtering of RR interval time series to detect ectopic (out of
      place) beats.
    * `mhrv.rri.dfa` - Detrended Fluctuation Analysis, a method of estimating the fractal
      scaling exponent of a signal [3].
    * `mhrv.rri.mse` - Multiscale Sample Entropy, a measure of the complexity of the
      signal computed on multiple time scales [4].
    * `mhrv.rri.sample_entropy` - Sample Entropy, a measure of the irregularity of a signal.

* HRV Metrics: Calculating quantitative measures that indicate the activity of
    the heart based on RR intervals using all standard HRV metrics defined in
    the literature (see e.g. [2]).
    * `mhrv.hrv.hrv_time` - Time Domain: AVNN, SDNN, RMSSD, pNNx.
    * `mhrv.hrv.hrv_freq` - Frequency Domain:
        * Total and normalized power in (configurable) VLF, LF, HF and custom
          user-defined bands.
        * Spectral power estimation using Lomb, Auto Regressive, Welch and FFT methods.
        * Additional frequency-domain features: LF/HF ratio, LF and HF peak
          frequencies, power-law scaling exponent (beta).
    * `mhrv.hrv.hrv_nonlinear` - Nonlinear methods:
        * Short- and long-term scaling exponents (alpha1, alpha2) based on DFA.
        * Sample Entropy and Multiscale sample entropy (MSE).
        * Poincaré plot metrics (SD1, SD2).
    * `mhrv.hrv.hrv_fragmentation` - Time-domain RR interval fragmentation analysis [5].

* Configuration: The toolbox is fully configurable with many user-adjustable
  parameters.
    * The configuration files are in human-readable YAML format which
      is easy to edit and extend.
    * The user can create custom configurations files based on the
      `defatuls.yml` file (only overriding what's required).
    * Custom configuration files can be loaded with a single call which updates
      the defaults for the entire toolbox. This allows simple, reproducible
      analysis of different datasets that require different analysis
      configurations. See the `mhrv.defaults` package.
    * The settings for any of the functions can either be configured globally
      with configuration `yml` files or on a per-call basis with matlab-style
      key-value argument pairs.

* Plotting: All toolbox functions support plotting their output for data
  visualization. The plotting code is separated from the algorithmic code in
  order to simplify embedding this toolbox in other matlab applications.
  See the `mhrv.plots` package.

* Top-level analysis functions: These functions work with PhysioNet records and
  allow streamlined HRV analysis by composing the functions of this toolbox.
    * `mhrv.mhrv` - Analyzes a single PhysioNet record (ECG data or annotations),
      optionally split into multiple analysis windows.  Extracts all
      supported HRV features and optionally generates plots.
    * `mhrv.mhrv_batch` - Analyzes many PhysioNet records (ECG data or annotations) which
      can be further separated into user-defined groups (e.g. Control, Test).
      Automatically computes HRV metrics per group and generates a comparative
      summary of the HRV features in each group.

## Requirements

* Matlab with Signal Processing toolbox. Should work on Matlab R2014b or newer.
* The [PhysioNet WFDB tools](https://www.physionet.org/physiotools/wfdb.shtml).
  The toolbox can install this for you.

## Installation

1. Clone the [repo](https://github.com/physiozoo/mhrv) or download the source code.

2. From matlab, run the `mhrv_init` function from the root of the repo. This
   function will:

    * Check for the presence of the WFDB tools in your system `PATH`.
    * If WFDB tools are not detected, it will attempt to automatically download
      them for you into the folder `bin/wfdb` under the repository root.
    * Set up your MATLAB path to include the code from this toolbox.

### Notes about matlab's `pwd` and `path`

Matlab maintains a PWD, or "present working directory". It's the folder you see
at the top of the interface, containing the files you see in the file explorer
pane. Type `pwd` at the matlab command prompt to see it's value.

Additionally, matlab maintains a PATH variable, containing a list of folders in
which it searches for function definitions (similar to the shell PATH concept).
Type `path` at the matlab command prompt to see it's value.

You don't need to change your `pwd` to the root of the repo folder for the
toolbox to work. You can simple run the `mhrv_init` function from your current
`pwd`, and it will take care of updating matlab's path. For example, if you
cloned or downloaded the toolbox in the folder `/Users/myname/mhrv/`, you can
run the following command from the matlab prompt:

```matlab
run /Users/myname/mhrv/mhrv_init.m
```

After this the toolbox will be ready to use, regardless of your `pwd`.

### Manual WFDB Installation

The above steps should be enough to get most users started.
In some cases `mhrv_init` may fail to download the correct binaries for you, or
you may want to install them yourself.

  * On macOS, you can use [homebrew](http://brew.sh). First install homebrew,
    then install `wfdb` with `brew tap brewsci/science && brew install -s wfdb`.
  * On any OS (including macOS), you can compile the WFDB binaries [from
    source](https://archive.physionet.org/physiotools/wfdb.shtml)
    using the instructions on their website.

Once you have the binaries, place them in some folder on your `$PATH` or
somewhere under the repo's root folder (`bin/wfdb` would be a good choice as it's
`.gitignore`d) and they will be found and used automatically.
You can replace the binaries that were automatically downloaded with your
compiled ones. If you used homebrew, they should already be on your `$PATH`.

If you would like to manually specify a path outside the repo which contains the
WFDB binaries (e.g. `/usr/local/bin` for a homebrew install), you can edit
[`cfg/defaults.yml`](https://github.com/physiozoo/mhrv/blob/master/cfg/defaults.yml)
and set the `mhrv.paths.wfdb_path` variable to the desired path.

For macOS users it's recommended to install with homebrew, and 
for linux users it's recommended to install from source, as the binaries provided
on the PhysioNet website are very outdated.

## Documentation

Documentation is available on
[readthedocs](https://mhrv.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).

## Usage
Exaple of calculating HRV measures for a PhysioNet record downloaded from
PhysioNet (in this case from
[`mitdb`](https://www.physionet.org/physiobank/database/mitdb/)):

```matlab
% Download the mitdb/111 record from PhysioNet to local folder named 'db'
>> mhrv.wfdb.download_wfdb_records('mitdb', '111', 'db');
```
```
[0.210] >> mitdb: Found 48 records
[0.300] >> mitdb: Found 1 annotators
[0.400] >> mitdb: Downloaded: 111.hea -> db/mitdb/111.hea
[0.500] >> mitdb: Downloaded: 111.atr -> db/mitdb/111.atr
[1.030] >> mitdb: Downloaded: 111.dat -> db/mitdb/111.dat
[1.040] >> mitdb: Done, 1 records downloaded.
```
```matlab
% Run HRV analysis
>> mhrv.mhrv('db/mitdb/111', 'window_minutes', 15, 'plot', true);
```
```
[0.010] >> mhrv: Processing record db/mitdb/111 (ch. 1)...
[0.010] >> mhrv: Signal duration: 00:30:05.555 [HH:mm:ss.ms]
[0.020] >> mhrv: Analyzing window 1 of 2...
[0.020] >> mhrv: [1/2] Detecting RR intervals from ECG... 1046 intervals detected.
[0.280] >> mhrv: [1/2] Removing ectopic intervals... 13 intervals removed.
[0.300] >> mhrv: [1/2] Calculating time-domain metrics...
[0.310] >> mhrv: [1/2] Calculating frequency-domain metrics...
[0.580] >> mhrv: [1/2] Calculating nonlinear metrics...
[0.660] >> mhrv: [1/2] Calculating fragmentation metrics...
[0.680] >> mhrv: Analyzing window 2 of 2...
[0.680] >> mhrv: [2/2] Detecting RR intervals from ECG... 1065 intervals detected.
[0.930] >> mhrv: [2/2] Removing ectopic intervals... 4 intervals removed.
[0.950] >> mhrv: [2/2] Calculating time-domain metrics...
[0.960] >> mhrv: [2/2] Calculating frequency-domain metrics...
[1.110] >> mhrv: [2/2] Calculating nonlinear metrics...
[1.180] >> mhrv: [2/2] Calculating fragmentation metrics...
[1.190] >> mhrv: Building statistics table...
[1.200] >> mhrv: Displaying Results...
                RR       NN      AVNN      SDNN      RMSSD      pNN50       SEM      BETA_LOMB    HF_NORM_LOMB    HF_PEAK_LOMB    HF_POWER_LOMB    LF_NORM_LOMB    LF_PEAK_LOMB    LF_POWER_LOMB    LF_TO_HF_LOMB    TOTAL_POWER_LOMB    VLF_NORM_LOMB    VLF_POWER_LOMB      SD1       SD2       alpha1     alpha2      SampEn        PIP        IALS        PSS       PAS  
              ______    ____    ______    ______    _______    _______    _______    _________    ____________    ____________    _____________    ____________    ____________    _____________    _____________    ________________    _____________    ______________    _______    ______    ________    _______    _________    _______    _________    ______    ______

    1           1046    1033    858.95    30.958     33.598      14.05    0.96322     -1.1881        63.899         0.16744          443.95            6.6518        0.056809         46.214            0.1041            694.76            25.832            179.47         23.769     36.77     0.64751    0.69834       1.8402     52.662       0.5281    60.213     11.81
    2           1065    1061    841.79    40.042     31.725     12.075     1.2293     -1.4542        51.529         0.16744          394.82            6.7584        0.044849         51.783           0.13116            766.21            35.367            270.99         22.444     51.96     0.70254    0.93526       1.8466     51.555      0.51698    55.702    14.138
    Mean      1055.5    1047    850.37      35.5     32.662     13.063     1.0963     -1.3212        57.714         0.16744          419.38            6.7051        0.050829         48.999           0.11763            730.48              30.6            225.23         23.106    44.365     0.67502     0.8168       1.8434     52.109      0.52254    57.958    12.974
    SE           9.5      14     8.581    4.5421    0.93663    0.98746    0.13305     0.13306        6.1852               0          24.564          0.053267       0.0059799         2.7844          0.013529            35.724            4.7674            45.757        0.66276    7.5954    0.027515    0.11846    0.0032216    0.55351    0.0055598    2.2554    1.1637
    Median    1055.5    1047    850.37      35.5     32.662     13.063     1.0963     -1.3212        57.714         0.16744          419.38            6.7051        0.050829         48.999           0.11763            730.48              30.6            225.23         23.106    44.365     0.67502     0.8168       1.8434     52.109      0.52254    57.958    12.974

[1.220] >> mhrv: Generating plots...
[3.260] >> mhrv: Finished processing record db/mitdb/111.
```

The `window_minutes` parameter allow splitting the signal into windows and
calculating all metrics per window. You can pass in an empty array `[]` to
disable spliting.

Example plots (generated by the example above):

* ECG R-peak detection ![Example Peak Detection](https://github.com/physiozoo/mhrv/blob/master/fig/example_ecg.png?raw=true)
* RR interval time series filtering ![Example RR filtering](https://github.com/physiozoo/mhrv/blob/master/fig/example_nn.png?raw=true)
* Time-domain HRV Metrics ![Example time domain metrics](https://github.com/physiozoo/mhrv/blob/master/fig/example_time.png?raw=true)
* Spectrum of interval time series ![Example NN spectrum](https://github.com/physiozoo/mhrv/blob/master/fig/example_spectrum.png?raw=true)
* Nonlinear HRV Metrics ![Example nonlinear metrics](https://github.com/physiozoo/mhrv/blob/master/fig/example_hrv.png?raw=true)
* Poincaré plot and ellipse fitting ![Example poincaré plot](https://github.com/physiozoo/mhrv/blob/master/fig/example_poincare.png?raw=true)


## Citing

This toolbox, initially called `rhrv`, was created as part of my MSc research
thesis. It was then renamed and updated to be used  as the basis of the
[PhysioZoo](https://physiozoo.github.io) platform for HRV analysis of human and
animal data.

To use it in you own research, please cite:

* Rosenberg, A. A. (2018) ‘Non-invasive in-vivo analysis of intrinsic clock-like
  pacemaker mechanisms: Decoupling neural input using heart rate variability
  measurements.’ MSc Thesis. Technion, Israel Institute of Technology.

* Behar J. A., Rosenberg A. A. et al. (2018) ‘PhysioZoo: a novel open access
  platform for heart rate variability analysis of mammalian
  electrocardiographic data.’ Frontiers in Physiology.


## Similar projects

Several other projects exist with various levels of overlapping functionality and
purpose.

* The [PhysioNet WFDB tools](https://www.physionet.org/physiotools/wfdb.shtml).
* The [WFDB toolbox for
  matlab](https://www.physionet.org/physiotools/matlab/wfdb-app-matlab/).
* The [R-HRV](http://rhrv.r-forge.r-project.org/) toolbox for the R language.
* The [Kubios](https://www.kubios.com/) software package.
* The [PhysioZoo](https://physiozoo.github.io/) platform for mammalian ECG and
  HRV analysis.

## Attribution

Some of the code in `lib/` was created by others, used here as dependencies.
Original author attribution exists in the source files.

## Contribution

Feel free to send pull requests or open issues via GitHub.

## References

1. Goldberger, A. L. et al. (2000) ‘PhysioBank, PhysioToolkit, and PhysioNet’,
   Circulation, 101(23), pp. E215-20.
2. Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American
   Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology. (1996) ‘Heart rate variability.
   Standards of measurement, physiological interpretation, and clinical use.’,
   European Heart Journal, 17(3), pp. 354–81.
3. Peng, C.-K., Hausdorff, J. M. and Goldberger, A. L. (2000) ‘Fractal mechanisms
   in neuronal control: human heartbeat and gait dynamics in health and disease,
   Self-organized biological dynamics and nonlinear control.’ Cambridge:
   Cambridge University Press.
4. Costa, M. D., Goldberger, A. L. and Peng, C.-K. (2005) ‘Multiscale entropy
   analysis of biological signals’, Physical Review E - Statistical, Nonlinear,
   and Soft Matter Physics, 71(2), pp. 1–18.
5. Costa, M. D., Davis, R. B. and Goldberger, A. L. (2017) ‘Heart Rate
   Fragmentation : A New Approach to the Analysis of Cardiac Interbeat Interval
   Dynamics’, Frontiers in Physiology, 8(May), pp. 1–13.

Commit message:

Fixed mhrv, mhrv_init, wfdb_header scripts after forking the repo. Updated the README with disclaimer.

README.md, after:

# mhrv

[![Documentation
Status](https://readthedocs.org/projects/mhrv/badge/?version=latest)](https://mhrv.readthedocs.io/en/latest/?badge=latest)

`mhrv` is a matlab toolbox for calculating Heart-Rate Variability (HRV) metrics
from both ECG signals and RR-interval time series. The toolbox works with ECG
data in the [PhysioNet](https://physionet.org/) [1] WFDB data format.

## Disclaimer

This is a forked version of the original repository [physiozoo/mhrv](https://github.com/physiozoo/mhrv). All credit goes to the authors of the original project.

In this fork, I just fixed some issues and made the tool more flexible for the needs of the Health Big Data project. To facilitate the identification of my changes in the code, simply look for comments starting with the string "PierMOD". In the following, a summary of the main changes I made with respect to the original GitHub repository:

* Modified file: +mhrv/+wfdb/+wfdb_header.m
  Edits: Small fixes
* Modified file: mhrv_init.m
  Edits: Small fixes
* Modified file: +mhrv/mhrv.m
  Edits: Added a check on total ECG duration before computing non-linear HRV indices, as too short RR series cause function mhrv.hrv.hrv_nonlinear to throw an error due to impossible sample entropy calculation. 

## Features

- **WFDB wrappers and helpers**. A small subset of the PhysioNet WFDB tools are
  wrapped with matlab functions, to allow using them directly from matlab. For
  example,
    * `mhrv.wfdb.gqrs` - A QRS detection algorithm.
    * `mhrv.wfdb.rdsamp` - For reading PhysioNet signal data into matlab.
    * `mhrv.wfdb.rdann` - For reading PhysioNet annotation data into matlab.
    * `mhrv.wfdb.wrann` - For writing PhysioNet annotation data from matlab datatypes.
    * `mhrv.wfdb.wfdb_header` - Read record metadata from a WFDB header file (`.hea`).

- **ECG signal processing**. Peak detection and RR interval extraction from ECG data
  in PhysioNet format. For example,
    * `mhrv.wfdb.rqrs` - Detection of R-peaks in ECG signals (based on PhysioNet's
      `gqrs`). Configurable for use with both human and animal ECGs.
    * `mhrv.ecg.jqrs`/`mhrv.ecg.wjqrs` - An ECG peak-detector based on a modified Pan & Tompkins
      algorithm and a windowed version.
    * `mhrv.ecg.bpfilt`- Bandpass filtering for removing noise artifacts from ECG
      signals.
    * `mhrv.wfdb.ecgrr` - Construction of RR intervals from ECG data in PhysioNet format.
    * `mhrv.wfdb.qrs_compare` - Comparison of QRS detections to reference annotations and
      calculation of quality measures like Sensitivity, PPV.

- **RR-intervals signal processing**. Ectopic beat rejection, frequency filtering,
  nonlinear dynamic and fractal analysis. For example,
    * `mhrv.rri.filtrr` - Filtering of RR interval time series to detect ectopic (out of
      place) beats.
    * `mhrv.rri.dfa` - Detrended Fluctuation Analysis, a method of estimating the fractal
      scaling exponent of a signal [3].
    * `mhrv.rri.mse` - Multiscale Sample Entropy, a measure of the complexity of the
      signal computed on multiple time scales [4].
    * `mhrv.rri.sample_entropy` - Sample Entropy, a measure of the irregularity of a signal.

* HRV Metrics: Calculating quantitative measures that indicate the activity of
    the heart based on RR intervals using all standard HRV metrics defined in
    the literature (see e.g. [2]).
    * `mhrv.hrv.hrv_time` - Time Domain: AVNN, SDNN, RMSSD, pNNx.
    * `mhrv.hrv.hrv_freq` - Frequency Domain:
        * Total and normalized power in (configurable) VLF, LF, HF and custom
          user-defined bands.
        * Spectral power estimation using Lomb, Auto Regressive, Welch and FFT methods.
        * Additional frequency-domain features: LF/HF ratio, LF and HF peak
          frequencies, power-law scaling exponent (beta).
    * `mhrv.hrv.hrv_nonlinear` - Nonlinear methods:
        * Short- and long-term scaling exponents (alpha1, alpha2) based on DFA.
        * Sample Entropy and Multiscale sample entropy (MSE).
        * Poincaré plot metrics (SD1, SD2).
    * `mhrv.hrv.hrv_fragmentation` - Time-domain RR interval fragmentation analysis [5].

* Configuration: The toolbox is fully configurable with many user-adjustable
  parameters.
    * The configuration files are in human-readable YAML format which
      is easy to edit and extend.
    * The user can create custom configurations files based on the
      `defatuls.yml` file (only overriding what's required).
    * Custom configuration files can be loaded with a single call which updates
      the defaults for the entire toolbox. This allows simple, reproducible
      analysis of different datasets that require different analysis
      configurations. See the `mhrv.defaults` package.
    * The settings for any of the functions can either be configured globally
      with configuration `yml` files or on a per-call basis with matlab-style
      key-value argument pairs.

* Plotting: All toolbox functions support plotting their output for data
  visualization. The plotting code is separated from the algorithmic code in
  order to simplify embedding this toolbox in other matlab applications.
  See the `mhrv.plots` package.

* Top-level analysis functions: These functions work with PhysioNet records and
  allow streamlined HRV analysis by composing the functions of this toolbox.
    * `mhrv.mhrv` - Analyzes a single PhysioNet record (ECG data or annotations),
      optionally split into multiple analysis windows.  Extracts all
      supported HRV features and optionally generates plots.
    * `mhrv.mhrv_batch` - Analyzes many PhysioNet records (ECG data or annotations) which
      can be further separated into user-defined groups (e.g. Control, Test).
      Automatically computes HRV metrics per group and generates a comparative
      summary of the HRV features in each group.

## Requirements

* Matlab with Signal Processing toolbox. Should work on Matlab R2014b or newer.
* The [PhysioNet WFDB tools](https://www.physionet.org/physiotools/wfdb.shtml).
  The toolbox can install this for you.

## Installation

1. Clone the [repo](https://github.com/physiozoo/mhrv) or download the source code.

2. From matlab, run the `mhrv_init` function from the root of the repo. This
   function will:

    * Check for the presence of the WFDB tools in your system `PATH`.
    * If WFDB tools are not detected, it will attempt to automatically download
      them for you into the folder `bin/wfdb` under the repository root.
    * Set up your MATLAB path to include the code from this toolbox.

### Notes about matlab's `pwd` and `path`

Matlab maintains a PWD, or "present working directory". It's the folder you see
at the top of the interface, containing the files you see in the file explorer
pane. Type `pwd` at the matlab command prompt to see it's value.

Additionally, matlab maintains a PATH variable, containing a list of folders in
which it searches for function definitions (similar to the shell PATH concept).
Type `path` at the matlab command prompt to see it's value.

You don't need to change your `pwd` to the root of the repo folder for the
toolbox to work. You can simple run the `mhrv_init` function from your current
`pwd`, and it will take care of updating matlab's path. For example, if you
cloned or downloaded the toolbox in the folder `/Users/myname/mhrv/`, you can
run the following command from the matlab prompt:

```matlab
run /Users/myname/mhrv/mhrv_init.m
```

After this the toolbox will be ready to use, regardless of your `pwd`.

### Manual WFDB Installation

The above steps should be enough to get most users started.
In some cases `mhrv_init` may fail to download the correct binaries for you, or
you may want to install them yourself.

  * On macOS, you can use [homebrew](http://brew.sh). First install homebrew,
    then install `wfdb` with `brew tap brewsci/science && brew install -s wfdb`.
  * On any OS (including macOS), you can compile the WFDB binaries [from
    source](https://archive.physionet.org/physiotools/wfdb.shtml)
    using the instructions on their website.

Once you have the binaries, place them in some folder on your `$PATH` or
somewhere under the repo's root folder (`bin/wfdb` would be a good choice as it's
`.gitignore`d) and they will be found and used automatically.
You can replace the binaries that were automatically downloaded with your
compiled ones. If you used homebrew, they should already be on your `$PATH`.

If you would like to manually specify a path outside the repo which contains the
WFDB binaries (e.g. `/usr/local/bin` for a homebrew install), you can edit
[`cfg/defaults.yml`](https://github.com/physiozoo/mhrv/blob/master/cfg/defaults.yml)
and set the `mhrv.paths.wfdb_path` variable to the desired path.

For macOS users it's recommended to install with homebrew, and 
for linux users it's recommended to install from source, as the binaries provided
on the PhysioNet website are very outdated.

## Documentation

Documentation is available on
[readthedocs](https://mhrv.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).

## Usage
Exaple of calculating HRV measures for a PhysioNet record downloaded from
PhysioNet (in this case from
[`mitdb`](https://www.physionet.org/physiobank/database/mitdb/)):

```matlab
% Download the mitdb/111 record from PhysioNet to local folder named 'db'
>> mhrv.wfdb.download_wfdb_records('mitdb', '111', 'db');
```
```
[0.210] >> mitdb: Found 48 records
[0.300] >> mitdb: Found 1 annotators
[0.400] >> mitdb: Downloaded: 111.hea -> db/mitdb/111.hea
[0.500] >> mitdb: Downloaded: 111.atr -> db/mitdb/111.atr
[1.030] >> mitdb: Downloaded: 111.dat -> db/mitdb/111.dat
[1.040] >> mitdb: Done, 1 records downloaded.
```
```matlab
% Run HRV analysis
>> mhrv.mhrv('db/mitdb/111', 'window_minutes', 15, 'plot', true);
```
```
[0.010] >> mhrv: Processing record db/mitdb/111 (ch. 1)...
[0.010] >> mhrv: Signal duration: 00:30:05.555 [HH:mm:ss.ms]
[0.020] >> mhrv: Analyzing window 1 of 2...
[0.020] >> mhrv: [1/2] Detecting RR intervals from ECG... 1046 intervals detected.
[0.280] >> mhrv: [1/2] Removing ectopic intervals... 13 intervals removed.
[0.300] >> mhrv: [1/2] Calculating time-domain metrics...
[0.310] >> mhrv: [1/2] Calculating frequency-domain metrics...
[0.580] >> mhrv: [1/2] Calculating nonlinear metrics...
[0.660] >> mhrv: [1/2] Calculating fragmentation metrics...
[0.680] >> mhrv: Analyzing window 2 of 2...
[0.680] >> mhrv: [2/2] Detecting RR intervals from ECG... 1065 intervals detected.
[0.930] >> mhrv: [2/2] Removing ectopic intervals... 4 intervals removed.
[0.950] >> mhrv: [2/2] Calculating time-domain metrics...
[0.960] >> mhrv: [2/2] Calculating frequency-domain metrics...
[1.110] >> mhrv: [2/2] Calculating nonlinear metrics...
[1.180] >> mhrv: [2/2] Calculating fragmentation metrics...
[1.190] >> mhrv: Building statistics table...
[1.200] >> mhrv: Displaying Results...
                RR       NN      AVNN      SDNN      RMSSD      pNN50       SEM      BETA_LOMB    HF_NORM_LOMB    HF_PEAK_LOMB    HF_POWER_LOMB    LF_NORM_LOMB    LF_PEAK_LOMB    LF_POWER_LOMB    LF_TO_HF_LOMB    TOTAL_POWER_LOMB    VLF_NORM_LOMB    VLF_POWER_LOMB      SD1       SD2       alpha1     alpha2      SampEn        PIP        IALS        PSS       PAS  
              ______    ____    ______    ______    _______    _______    _______    _________    ____________    ____________    _____________    ____________    ____________    _____________    _____________    ________________    _____________    ______________    _______    ______    ________    _______    _________    _______    _________    ______    ______

    1           1046    1033    858.95    30.958     33.598      14.05    0.96322     -1.1881        63.899         0.16744          443.95            6.6518        0.056809         46.214            0.1041            694.76            25.832            179.47         23.769     36.77     0.64751    0.69834       1.8402     52.662       0.5281    60.213     11.81
    2           1065    1061    841.79    40.042     31.725     12.075     1.2293     -1.4542        51.529         0.16744          394.82            6.7584        0.044849         51.783           0.13116            766.21            35.367            270.99         22.444     51.96     0.70254    0.93526       1.8466     51.555      0.51698    55.702    14.138
    Mean      1055.5    1047    850.37      35.5     32.662     13.063     1.0963     -1.3212        57.714         0.16744          419.38            6.7051        0.050829         48.999           0.11763            730.48              30.6            225.23         23.106    44.365     0.67502     0.8168       1.8434     52.109      0.52254    57.958    12.974
    SE           9.5      14     8.581    4.5421    0.93663    0.98746    0.13305     0.13306        6.1852               0          24.564          0.053267       0.0059799         2.7844          0.013529            35.724            4.7674            45.757        0.66276    7.5954    0.027515    0.11846    0.0032216    0.55351    0.0055598    2.2554    1.1637
    Median    1055.5    1047    850.37      35.5     32.662     13.063     1.0963     -1.3212        57.714         0.16744          419.38            6.7051        0.050829         48.999           0.11763            730.48              30.6            225.23         23.106    44.365     0.67502     0.8168       1.8434     52.109      0.52254    57.958    12.974

[1.220] >> mhrv: Generating plots...
[3.260] >> mhrv: Finished processing record db/mitdb/111.
```

The `window_minutes` parameter allow splitting the signal into windows and
calculating all metrics per window. You can pass in an empty array `[]` to
disable spliting.

Example plots (generated by the example above):

* ECG R-peak detection ![Example Peak Detection](https://github.com/physiozoo/mhrv/blob/master/fig/example_ecg.png?raw=true)
* RR interval time series filtering ![Example RR filtering](https://github.com/physiozoo/mhrv/blob/master/fig/example_nn.png?raw=true)
* Time-domain HRV Metrics ![Example time domain metrics](https://github.com/physiozoo/mhrv/blob/master/fig/example_time.png?raw=true)
* Spectrum of interval time series ![Example NN spectrum](https://github.com/physiozoo/mhrv/blob/master/fig/example_spectrum.png?raw=true)
* Nonlinear HRV Metrics ![Example nonlinear metrics](https://github.com/physiozoo/mhrv/blob/master/fig/example_hrv.png?raw=true)
* Poincaré plot and ellipse fitting ![Example poincaré plot](https://github.com/physiozoo/mhrv/blob/master/fig/example_poincare.png?raw=true)


## Citing

This toolbox, initially called `rhrv`, was created as part of my MSc research
thesis. It was then renamed and updated to be used  as the basis of the
[PhysioZoo](https://physiozoo.github.io) platform for HRV analysis of human and
animal data.

To use it in you own research, please cite:

* Rosenberg, A. A. (2018) ‘Non-invasive in-vivo analysis of intrinsic clock-like
  pacemaker mechanisms: Decoupling neural input using heart rate variability
  measurements.’ MSc Thesis. Technion, Israel Institute of Technology.

* Behar J. A., Rosenberg A. A. et al. (2018) ‘PhysioZoo: a novel open access
  platform for heart rate variability analysis of mammalian
  electrocardiographic data.’ Frontiers in Physiology.


## Similar projects

Several other projects exist with various levels of overlapping functionality and
purpose.

* The [PhysioNet WFDB tools](https://www.physionet.org/physiotools/wfdb.shtml).
* The [WFDB toolbox for
  matlab](https://www.physionet.org/physiotools/matlab/wfdb-app-matlab/).
* The [R-HRV](http://rhrv.r-forge.r-project.org/) toolbox for the R language.
* The [Kubios](https://www.kubios.com/) software package.
* The [PhysioZoo](https://physiozoo.github.io/) platform for mammalian ECG and
  HRV analysis.

## Attribution

Some of the code in `lib/` was created by others, used here as dependencies.
Original author attribution exists in the source files.

## Contribution

Feel free to send pull requests or open issues via GitHub.

## References

1. Goldberger, A. L. et al. (2000) ‘PhysioBank, PhysioToolkit, and PhysioNet’,
   Circulation, 101(23), pp. E215-20.
2. Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American
   Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology. (1996) ‘Heart rate variability.
   Standards of measurement, physiological interpretation, and clinical use.’,
   European Heart Journal, 17(3), pp. 354–81.
3. Peng, C.-K., Hausdorff, J. M. and Goldberger, A. L. (2000) ‘Fractal mechanisms
   in neuronal control: human heartbeat and gait dynamics in health and disease,
   Self-organized biological dynamics and nonlinear control.’ Cambridge:
   Cambridge University Press.
4. Costa, M. D., Goldberger, A. L. and Peng, C.-K. (2005) ‘Multiscale entropy
   analysis of biological signals’, Physical Review E - Statistical, Nonlinear,
   and Soft Matter Physics, 71(2), pp. 1–18.
5. Costa, M. D., Davis, R. B. and Goldberger, A. L. (2017) ‘Heart Rate
   Fragmentation : A New Approach to the Analysis of Cardiac Interbeat Interval
   Dynamics’, Frontiers in Physiology, 8(May), pp. 1–13.
